1 Which of the following is not a feature of a village?
A Less population
B Less diversity C 
C Impersonal relationship
D Predominance of primary sector and allied activities
2 Which among the following is not a form of diversity in India?
A Geographical diversity
B Linguistic diversity D 
C Religious diversity
D None of the above
3 Caste is not a/an ......................
A Endogamous system
D 
B Hereditary system
C Hierarchical system
D Exogamous system
4 Marriage of one man with several sisters is called .......................
A Monogamous marriage
B Sororal polygyny B 
C Non-Sororal polygyny
D Levirate
5 The Hindu Marriage Act was enacted in the year .......................
A 1945
B 1955 B 
C 1965
D 1975
6 ‘History of Human Marriage’ is written by .....................
A Malinowski
B Westermarck B 
C A.R. Desai
D S.C. Dube
7 More women and less men may lead to ..................
A Polygamy
B 
B Polygyny
C Polyandry
D None of the above
8 Which among the following is not an endogamous group?
A Caste
B Varna C 
C Gotra
D Religion
9 Kinship relations established through blood is called ......................
A Affinal
B Conjugal C 
C Consanguineous
D None of the above
10 Marriage of high caste man with a low caste woman is called.......................
A Hypogamy
B Hypergamy A 
C Monogamy
D Endogamy
11 When a man marries the sister of his death wife is called......................
A Exogamy 
 C 
B B. Endogamy
C C. Sororate
D D. Levirate
12 Which of the following factors may bring changes in marriage system?
A Traditional values
B Customs
C Folkways
D Modern education D
13 Private property in land introduced in India during ..................
A Ancient period
B Medieval period
C British period C
D After Independence
14 Fragmentation of land may not lead to .......................
A Less yielding
B Poverty
C Higher production C
D Growth of indebtedness
15 The example of non-cultivating owners of land is .........................
A Absentee landlord A
B Farmers
C Peasants
D None of the above
16 The full form of OBC is........................
A Other Backward Class A
B Other Backward Caste
C Over Backward Class
D Over Backward Caste
17 Common territory is a feature of ............................
A SC
B ST B
C OBC
D All of the above
18 Geographical isolation is a problem for ..............................
A Caste
B Class
C Tribe C
D Religion
19 Which of the following statement is NOT correct about Pradhan Mantra Kaushal Vikas Yojna? 
A It was launched in March 2015. 
B It will be implemented by the ministry of skill development and 
entrepreneurship. 
C It will provide training to 300 million youths. C
D It will focus on the class X and class XII students. 
20 Launching of Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojna is related to the................
A Vallabh Bhai Patel 
B Deen Dayal Upadhyay 
C Mahatma Gandhi 
D Jai Prakash Narayan D
21 Jawahar Gram Samriddhi Yojna was launched in...................
A 1999 
B 2001 B
C 1996 
D 1995 
22 “TRYSEM” a Programme made for the
A Employment to Rural youths A
B Employment to Urban youths 
C Development of nutrition intake in the food of poor of the country. 
D Providing road connectivity to the villages
23 When National Horticulture Mission was launched?
A 2001 
B 2010 
C 2005 C
D 2007 
24 A scientific distinction between rural and urban community can be made on the basis of 
.......... 
A density of population A
B area covered 
C occupation followed by people. 
D None of these
25 Industrialization weakens the ......................
A Role of religion in social life 
B Father’s authority in the family 
C Caste system 
D All of these D
26 Unlike village community, urban society lacks in .............................
A Secondary social control 
B Social tolerance 
C Self - sufficiency C
D None of these 
27 ......................... is a self - contained unit where members share a sense of belonging and a 
common territorial base. 
A Society 
B Community B
C Association 
D None of these 
28 is the term used to refer the relationship between human beings and their physical 
environment 
A Human physiology 
B Human ecology B
C Human environment 
D None of these 
29 The change in village community may be seen in .................
A Caste system 
B Jajmani system 
C Family system 
D All of these D
30 Why did villages in India tend to have more autonomy than villages in surrounding countries? 
A Villages in India were recognized as independent social units, each with their 
own council of leaders A 
B Each village in India had its own army, which meant that villages had more 
political autonomy 
C Villages in India had higher income which meant that villages had more 
economic autonomy 
D None of these
31 Why are the villages in India witnessing a change in their overall economic activities? 
A Bigger families and less sources of income 
B Small agricultural lands with less productivity 
C After getting educated, the younger generation does not want to stay in the 
villages 
D All of these D
32 In India, which of the following year the Department of Ministry for Women and Child 
development was formed? 
A 1983
B 1985 B
C 1987
D 1991
33 Which of the following factors responsible for contributing in social change?
A Cultural pluralism 
B Outstanding leadership 
C Technological development 
D All of these D
34 There were several evil social practices like sati, child marriage, ban on widow remarriage, 
practice of polygamy, etc. which wes a matter of debate during................. 
A 17th Century 
B 18th Century 
C 19th Century C
D 20th Century 
35 Schedule V and VI of the Indian constitution are related to...............
A Decide state boundaries between the states 
B Decide the powers and responsibilities of Panchayati Raj 
C Protection of rights of tribals C
D Protection of minorities in the country
36 Which one of the following is not the basis of community? 
A Common locality 
B Community sentiment 
C Common political ideology C
D Common way of life 
37 Which among the following is the distinctive characteristic of human society? 
A Capacity to propagate offspring’s 
B Aggressive behaviour 
C Culture C
D Self or We feeling 
38 ............................. is a socially defined position in a group or society. 
A Role 
B Interaction 
C Status C
D Deviance 
39 Farming is the chief occupation of the people belonging to ......................
A The pastoral classes 
B The agricultural classes B
C The commercial classes 
D None of the above 
40 In an agrarian society, who are living by tilling the lands of others on a crop sharing basis? 
A Cultivators 
B Share croppers B
C Overseers 
D Seasonal peasants 
41 Patriarchal society means ......................
A a society dominated by men A
B b) a society dominated by women
C c) a society where there is equality between men and women
D d) None of these
42 The Equal Remuneration Act, of _______ provides that equal wages should be paid to equal 
work. 
A 1977
B 1976 B
C 1986
D 2021
43 The National Average of child sex ratio (number of girl children per thousand boys) in the 
country as per Census 2011 was .................................... 
A 961
B 944
C 914 C
D 1020
44 ........................... are those laws that deal with family-related matters such as marriage, 
divorce, adoption, inheritance, etc. 
A Family Laws A
B Law of Inheritance
C Religious Laws
D State Laws
45 Deforestation may reduce the chances of .............................
A Rainfall A
B Soil Erosion
C Landslides
D All of these
46 What is the main significance of sustainable development?
A to preserve the natural resources for the needs of the future generation A
B to exploit the available resource for rapid improvement
C to increase the cost of available natural resources
D to increase the reservoirs of natural resources
47 Which of the following is not a natural resource?
A Water 
B Electricity B
C Air
D Soil
48 Which sector is the backbone of Indian economy?
A Agriculture sector A
B Industrial sector
C Financial Sector
D Tourism Sector
49 Which among the following does not belong to welfare schemes for the farmers?
A Kisan Credit Card Scheme
B SHG Bank Linkage Programme
C National Agricultural Insurance Scheme
D Employee Referral Scheme D
50 When was On Farm Water Management Scheme launched?
A July 2000
B March 2002 B
C March 2004
D January 2004
51 Which of the following is the major source of fresh water which is available in India?
A Ocean Water
B River Water
C Pond Water
D Ground Water D
52 The rank of India in terms of water availability per person pain the world is......................
A 130
B 131
C 132
D 133 D
53 Ground water is accessed by
A Drilling/Digging Wells A
B Drip Irrigation
C Bamboo Irrigation
D None of these
54 Which Is Not a Source of Fresh Water?
A Glaciers and ice sheets
B Oceans B
C Rivers
D Surface run-off water
55 Which of the following is/are not causes of water scarcity?
A Growing Population
B Growing water intensive crops
C Expansion of Irrigation facilities
D Water harvesting techniques D
56 The Ministry of Water Resources estimates total water demand rising to in 2025 is .............
A 1093 BCM A
B 3003 BCM
C 4053 BCM
D 5083 BCM
57 Which Policy stipulates water allocation priorities?
A Jal Kranti Abhiyan
B National mission for Ganga clean
C National water policy C
D Jal Shakti mission
58 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act was enacted in the year ................
A 1979
B 1974 B
C 2004
D 1994
59 The rapid reduction in groundwater table in several regions in India is primarily the result is ....
A Climate change
B Over exploitation of the ground water for irrigation B
C Ground water use for domestic purposes
D Lack of artificial recharge of ground water
60 What is 'virtual water'?
A Wastewater generated from domestic activities
B The volume of water used in the production of goods and services B
C Water used for irrigation
D None of these
61 A major portion of the rural population consists of ........................ income groups.
A Low A
B Medium
C High
D None of these
62 Many companies are now turning their attention to ................. markets
A Urban
B Rural B
C Global
D None of these
63 For rural marketing .............................. pricing is more suitable.
A Penetration A
B Skimming
C Going
D None of these
64 Marketing research is a part of ............................. stage of rural marketing strategy.
A Execution
B Planning B
C Feedback
D Implementation
65 White revolution relates to .....................
A Agriculture
B Dairy (Milk) farming B
C Aquaculture
D Mineral resources
66 Green Revolution relates to .................
A Agriculture A
B Dairy (Milk) farming
C Aquaculture
D Mineral resources
67 Blue revolution relates to ...................
A Aquaculture A
B Agriculture
C Milk production
D Bee Keeping
68 Consider the following statements:
1) The Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme was launched during 1996-97 to 
provide loan assistance to poor farmers. 
2) The Command Area Development Programme was launched in 1974-75 for the 
development of water-use efficiency. 
Which of these statements is/are correct? 
A 1 only
B Both 1 and 2
C 2 only C
D None of these
69 Unnat Bharat Ahiyaan is the flagship programme of the .........................
A Minstry of Women and Child Welfare
B Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) B
C Ministry of Agriculture
D Ministry of Rural Development
70 How many higher educational institutions have been identified for the implementation of 
Unnat Bharat Abhiyaan? 
A 720
B 750 B
C 710
D 950
71 Which of the following is the ‘National Coordinating Institute’ for the implementation of 
Unnat Bharat Abhiyaan? 
A IIT Chenai
B IIT Bombay
C IISc Bangalore
D IIT Delhi D
72 The Unnat Bharat Abhiyaan is focused to promote development of rural areas based on .........
A Ghandhian vision of ‘rural republics’ using local resources and decentralized 
eco-friendly technologies 
A
B Ghandian vision of religious tolerance and grama swaraj
C Ghandian principle separation of politics from the influence of religion
D All of these
73 Unnat Bharat Abhyaan has an intention to ................
A To build strong base of rural education in higher educational institutions
B To leverage knowledge and resources of premier educational and research 
institute in rural development 
B
C To inform the students about government schemes and programmes for rural 
development 
D None of these
74 Unnat Bharat Abhiyaan focus on intervention in the following areas of rural development:
1. Human Resource Development 
2. Material/Economic Development 
A 1 only
B 2 only
C Both 1 and 2 C
D Neither 1 nor 2
75 One of the following is not a characteristic of rural lifestyle.
A Lower population density
B Better job opportunity in MNCs and higher level of income B
C A smaller choice when it comes to shopping, medical services, etc.
D All of these
76 ‘Pongal’ and ‘Baisakhi’ are the harvest festival of the following states respectively.
A Panjab and Karnataka
B Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
C Tamil Nadu and Punjab C
D Punjab and Tamil Nadu
77 ‘Geographical isolation’ is one of the
A Chronic health issues observed in rural areas of India
B One of the disparities faced by the rural people in India B
C Method of punishment to the social offenders during traditional village life
D None of these
78 One of the following is the basic unit of society.
A Family A
B Non Governmental Organizations
C Religious units
D Social clubs
79 ‘Coresidentiality’ means
A that the residences are located in the same locality in the rural area
B that they have joint ownership of property
C that members of a family live under the same roof C
D that they eat together using a common kitchen
80 ‘Commensality’ implies
A that the residences are located in the same locality in the rural area
B that they have joint ownership of property
C that members of a family live under the same roof
D that they eat together using a common kitchen D
81 ‘Co-parcenary’ means
A that the residences are located in the same locality in the rural area
B that they have joint ownership of property B
C that members of a family live under the same roof
D that they eat together using a common kitchen
82 ‘Linear Settlement’ means ....................
A the houses are strung out, each surrounded by its own compound. However, 
there is little to physically demarcate where one village ends and another 
begins. 
A 
B a tight cluster of houses is surrounded by the fields of the villagers.
C simply a scattering of homesteads or clusters of two or three houses. In this 
case also physical demarcation of villages is not clear. 
D None of these
83 The biological and psychological function of a family include:
1. Reproduction 
2. Division of Labour 
3. Love and Affection 
4. Selection of Life mate 
A 1 only
B Both 1 and 2
C Both 1 and 3 C
D All of these
84 Which of the following is not a social and economic function of a family? 
1. Status establishment 
2. Division of Labour 
3. Love and Affection 
4. Selection of Life mate 
A 1 only
B Both 1 and 2
C 4 only
D 3 only D
85 Which of the following are the characteristics of caste system?
A Restricted Food habits
B Reinforcement by Religious Beliefs
C Caste Associations
D All of these D
86 Caste and Gender are..............
A Not related
B Highly correlated B
C Caste has no influence on gender behaviour
D None of these
87 Chastity of Women strongly related to ................
A Caste status A
B Social behaviour of women
C Religious practices
D None of these
88 Rural Value System is primarily ....................................
A Individualistic
B Communitarian and relational B
C Self oriented
D All of these
89 One of the following is the reward of Rural Value System.
A Economic dominance
B Political Status in the society
C Emotional Support C
D None of these
90 Which of the following underpins the existence of human society and civilization?
A Regular source of income
B Socio-economic status
C Muscle and Money power
D Nature D
91 Which one of the following is a type of resource based on the sources of its origin?
A Potential Resources
B Biotic and Abiotic resources B
C Community Resources
D All of these
92 Who stated ‘Soul of India lives in her villages’.
A Bala Gangadhara Tilak
B Mahatma Gandhiji B
C Sardar Vallabha Bhai Patel
D None of these
93 Gandhiji emphasised that all social property should be held in trust. This related to .............
A Trusteeship A
B Panchayat Raj System
C Democratic Decentralization
D All of these
94 Which of the following related with development of Rural Road infrastructure?
A Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Yojana (PMKSY)
B Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY – G)
C Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) C
D All of these
95 The Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) was launched in ...........
A 2021
B 2015 B
C 2020
D 2019
96 The Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) aims to provide ..................
A clean cooking fuel to rural poor A
B Electricity connection to rural households
C Supply of pure and clear drinking water rural households
D All of these
97 Which one of the following is instrumental Indian Green Revolution?
A Former Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi
B Shri M S Swaminathan B
C Shri Varghese Kurian
D None of these
98 Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) was launched in 2015 by the Prime Minister 
Sri Narendra Modi regime to promote ......................... 
A Cultivation of commercial crops
B Dairy farming
C Organic farming C
D None of these
99 Which of the following is/are determinants of Rural Livelihood?
1. Gender 
2. Caste 
3. Inherited livelihood 
4. Education and migration 
A 1 and 2 only
B 1, 2, and 4 only
C 2, 3, and 4 only
D All of these D
100 Which of the following is/are not a factor determining the Rural Livelihood Diversification?
1. Age 
2. Consumption habits and preferences 
3. Access to the Credit facility and ability to borrow
4. Dependency Ratio
A 2 only
B 1 and 3 only
C 1, 2, and 4 only
D 1, 3, and 4 only D
101 ‘De Jure Possession’ with respect to the ownership of land means ..............
A Possession in the eyes of law with legal title to the land ownership A
B Mere occupation and use of land and property
C Ownership of the land for being in possession for relatively longer period
D All of these
102 The formal ownership rights/presumptive titling is based on legal documents such as ............
A Sale Deed
B Tax Receipts
C Record of Rights
D All of these D
103 Which of the following Act aims at ‘digitization’ of land records?
A ‘Draft Model of Land Title Act, 2019’ by NITI Aayog. A
B National Sample Survey Report, 2019
C Land Redistribution and Reforms Policy, 2007
D Forest Rishts Act, 2006
104 Which of the following grants equal rights to the women of Hindu community to the ancestral 
property” 
A Hindu Marriage and Succession Act, 2005
B Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 B
C Draft Model of Land Titles Act, 2019
D Land Redistribution and Reforms Policy, 2007
105 The percentage amount of water locked up in glaciers is ............... of the water on earth.
A 5%
B 3%
C 2% C
D 97%
106 Which of the following is not a water management method?
A Desiltation
B Artificial rains and feeding 
C Afforestation B
D All of these
107 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act was enacted in ............... to provide for 
the prevention and control of water pollution, and for the maintaining or restoring of 
wholesomeness of water in the country. 
A 1974 A
B 1997
C 2003
D 2021
108 Animal husbandry refers .........................
A to livestock raising and selective breeding A
B to aquaculture
C Commercial exploitation of animals
D None of these
109 Apiculture and Pisciculture related to the following respectively.
A Fish Farming and Bee Farming
B Bee Farming and Fish Farming B
C Bee Farming and Dairy Farming
D Poultry Farming and Fish Farming
110 JAM Trinity for rural non-farm livelihood promotion means.....................
A Job, Achievement and Money
B Jan Dhan, Aadhar and Mobile B
C Jan Dhan, Account and Money
D None of these
111 ‘Skill India’ campaign was launched in .................. 
A 2020
B 2015 B
C 2018
D 2022
112 NRLM means
A National Rural Labour Mission
B National Rural Livelihood Mission B
C National Rural Legislative Mission
D None of these
113 Rural marketing is nowadays understood through the axes of 4A’s which are
A Availability, Affordability, Acceptability, and Awareness A
B Availability, Affordability, Acceptability, and Ability
C Availability, Affordability, Ability, and Awareness
D Availability, Ability, Acceptability, and Awareness
114 Which of the following is/are the challenges of Rural Marketing?
A Dispersed markets
B Lack of communication and transport facilities
C Prevalence of spurious brands and seasonal demand
D All of these D




1 Which of the following are the objectives of the Beti Bachao Beti Paddao scheme? 
1. Prevent female infanticide 
2. Prevent child marriages 
3. Ensure protection of a girl child 
4.Ensure education of a girl child 
 A 1,3,4 
 B 2,3,4, D 
 C 3 and 4 
 D All 
2 Which festival was organized on the theme of Beti Bachao Beti Padhao? 
 A Kala Mahotsava 
 B Mala Utsav D 
 C Jana Utsav 
 D Kala Utsav 
3 Which of the following is a nodal ministry for Beti Bachao Beti Padhao scheme? 
 A Ministry of Home Affairs 
C 
 B Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 C Ministry of Women and Child Development 
 D Niti Ayog 
4 Who gave the slogan ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’? 
 A Women and Child Development Minister Smriti Irani 
 B Prime Minister Sri Narendra Modi B 
 C Home Minister Amit Saha 
 D None of these 
5 When did ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao abhiyan’ started? 
 A 22 January 2016 
 B 22 January 2015 B 
 C 22 January 2018 
 D 22 January 2022 
6 Which is the National Girl Child Day? 
 A 12 January 
 B 24 January B 
 C 14 January 
 D 10 January 
7 ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’ launched in 
 A Rajastan 
B 
 B Haryana 
 C Punjab 
 D Karnataka 
8 Who designed the logo of ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’ abhiyan? 
 A Sri Narendra Modi 
 B Dr Manmohan Singh C 
 C Shri A J Raghuvendra 
 D None of these 
9 Customary Village Councils (CVCs) are 
 A State sponsored organizations for local administration 
 B Privately managed administrative bodies with government financial support C 
 C Traditional, non-state and unofficial local bodies participating in rural 
administration 
 D None of these 
10 ‘Khap Panchayat’ is an example of ..............
 A Traditional and non-official local institution participating in village 
administration 
 B Government sponsored traditional private establishments of village A 
administration 
 C A form of government approved judicial institutions functioning in Indian 
village administration 
 D None of these 
11 One of the following started promoting Self Help Groups (SHGs) since 1992 with primary 
focus on empowerment of women and marginalized sections of the society. 
 A Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
 C 
 B Regional Rural Banks 
 C National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) 
 D Village Cooperative Societies 
12 Which of the following problems faced by the Self Help Groups (SHGs)? 
 A Inadequate financial assistance 
 B Poor financial management D 
 C Lack of stability and unity 
 D All of these 
13 Which of the following committee connected with matters relating to Panchayat Raj system? 
 A Balwant Rai Mehta Committe 
 B Ashok Mehta Committee D 
 C G V K Rao Committee 
 D All of these 
14 Which of the following Constitutional Amendment Act provides for the establishment of 
Panchayats and Grama Sabha as the foundation of Panchayat Raj System? 
 A 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1990 
 B 74 C th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
 C 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
 D 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1994 
15 Panchayat Raj is a 
 A Three – tier system 
 B Two – tier system A 
 C Single layer system 
 D None of these 
16 Not less than .............. of the total number of seats to be reserved for women, further not less 
than ..................... of the total number of offices for chairperson at all levels of the panchayat to 
be reserved for women. 
 A One-third ; One-third 
 B One –third and two-third A 
 C Two-third: One-third 
 D One-third; one-fourth 
17 Which of the Articles of Indian Constitution makes provisions for disqualifications from the 
panchayats membership? 
 A Article 243B 
 B Article 243F B 
 C Article 243J 
 D Article 243K 
18 Minimum age prescribed to contest in Panchayat elections is ............ 
 A 25 years 
 B 30 years C 
 C 21 years 
 D 18 years 
19 Article ................enshrines the provisions with respect to elections of the Panchayats. 
 A Article 243O 
 B Article 243F D 
 C Article 243J 
 D Article 243K 
20 Article ................ bars the courts to interfere in the Panchayat Matters. 
 A Article 243O 
 B Article 243F A 
 C Article 243J 
 D Article 243K 
21 PESA Act means ............... 
 A Panchayat Extension and Stipulated Activities Act. 
B 
 B Panchayats Extension to Scheduled Area Act. 
 C People Empowerment and Skill Augmentation Act 
 D None of these 
22 Who is recognized as ‘Father of Rural Development’ in India? 
 A S K Dey 
A B Rabindranath Tagore 
 C Raja Ram Mohan Roy 
 D Sardar Vallabha Bai Patel 
23 What is the Swachh Bharat Cess (SBC) rate shall be levied and collected in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2015? 
 A 1.5% of the value of taxable service 
C 
 B 0.75% of the value of taxable service 
 C 0.5% of the value of taxable service 
 D 0.25% of the value of taxable service 
24 Which one of the following committees is not connected with Panchayat Raj system? 
 A Drafting Committee 
 B Balwant Rai Mehta Committee 
A C Ashok Mehta Committee 
 D GVK Rao Committee 
25 Balwant Rai Mehta Committee for Panchayat Raj was appointed in the year ................... 
 A 1968 
D 
 B 1947 
 C 1950 
 D 1957 
26 Who is called as the ‘Father of Panchayat Raj System’ in India? 
 A L M Singhvi 
C B Ahsok Mehta 
 C Balwant Rai Mehta 
 D G V K Rao 
27 Which is the primary and permanent body of Panchayat Raj system? 
 A Standing Committee 
B 
 B Gram Sabha 
 C Khap Panchayat 
 D None of these 
28 Who holds a record book of details like the map of the land, the crops that are grown there, the 
owner’s name, etc. 
 A District Collector 
B B Patwari (Land Measurer) 
 C Panchayat President 
 D None of these 
29 Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is a comprehensive and integrated flagship programme of 
Government of India to attain ................. 
 A Quality Higher Education 
D B Proficiency in Technical Education 
 C Skill and Expertise in Medical Education 
 D Universal Elementary Education (UEE) 
30 Right to Education Act (RTE) came into force on ........................... 
 A 1 April 2010 
A 
 B 22 April 2010 
 C 11 April 2010 
 D 1 April 2018 
31 ‘Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat’ is a nation-wide sub-programme of ................
 A Holistic Education 
D B New Education Policy (NEP) 
 C National Education Policy (NEP) 
 D Sarva Siksha Abhiyan 
32 The NIPUN Bharat Mission was launched as part of ........................ 
 A Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan in 2021 
 B Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan in 2021 B 
 C National Education Policy (NEP) in 2021 
 D None of these 
33 A government of India initiative launched by the then Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to 
create a literate society through a variety of teaching–learning programmes for the non-literate 
and neo-literate of 15 years and above is called as .................... 
 A Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan 
D 
 B Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
 C Madhyamika Shiksha Abhiyan 
 D Saakshar Bharat 
34 Who was made as the brand ambassador of ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’ initiative .......... 
 A Olympian Sakshi Mallik 
A 
 B Olympian Nirav Chopra 
 C Olympian Vijendra Kuman 
 D Olympian Abhinav Bindra 
35 Who started ‘Selfie With Daughter’ initiative? 
 A Narendra Modi C 
 B Dr Manmohan Singh 
 C Sunil Jaglan 
 D Smt. Smriti Irani 
36 Indian healthcare has evolved over the past three decades and is currently at a very critical 
juncture to achieve the 3As of healthcare; where 3As mean: 
 A Affordability, Accountability, Accuracy 
C 
 B Accessibility, Availability, Accountability 
 C Affordability, Accessibility and Availability 
 D Accessibility, Authenticity, Accountability 
37 ‘Ayushman Bharat’ initiative aiming at achieving Universal Health Coverage was launched in 
the year ....................... 
 A 2021 
C 
 B 2015 
 C 2018 
 D 2022 
38 National Health Protection Mission will have a defined benefit cover of ............... per family 
per year 
 A Rs. 3 lakhs 
C 
 B Rs. 10 lakhs 
 C Rs. 5 lakhs 
 D Rs. 1.5 lakhs 
39 India’s largest National Health Protection Scheme has been implemented under the name 
.............
 A Samman Bharat 
B 
 B Ayushman Bharat 
 C Adarsh Bharat 
 D Nirmaan Bharat 
40 Who will head the Ayushman Bharat National Health Protection Mission Council (ABNHPMC) formed at national level to implement the scheme?
 A Prime Minister 
B 
 B Minister of Health and Family Welfare 
 C Minister of Ayush 
 D Chairman of NITI Ayog 
41 The states and UTs are required to set up SHA for the implementation of the scheme. What 
does SHA stands for?
 A State Health Agency A 
 B Society Health Agency 
 C Strategic Health Agency 
 D Social Health Agency 
42 The Ayushman Bharat aims to target about .................... beneficiaries under the scheme?
 A 100 crore 
 B 10.74 crore B 
 C 10.47 crore 
 D 10.65 crore 
43 The government has partnered with which entity to make the process cashless?
 A Paytm 
 B Reliance C 
 C NITI Ayog 
 D None of these 
44 Under the Ayushman Bharat programme, government has announced two major initiatives 
namely National Health Protection Scheme and Health and Wellness Centre as the two flagship 
programme with the aim to build New India by .......................... 
 A 2022 
 B 2021 A 
 C 2030 
 D 2047 
45 With reference to ‘Ayushman Bharat’ initiative, which of the following statement is correct? 
1. Under the Ayushman Bharat programme, government has announced two major 
initiatives namely National Health Protection Scheme and Health and Wellness Centre 
as the two flagship programme with the aim to build New India 
2. The expenses incurred in this scheme are shared between the Centre and the States in 
60:40 ratio. 
 A 1 only 
 B 2 only C 
 C Both 1 and 2 
 D Neither 1 nor 2 
46 Which of the following is linked with ‘Ayushman Bharat’ yojana? 
 A ABHA 
 B ASHA A 
 C USHA 
 D None of these 
47 ABHA stands for ........... in Ayushman Bharat. 
 A All Body Health Assessment 
 B Ayushman Bharat Health Account B 
 C Ayushman Bharat Health Assessment 
 D Agreement of Body and Health Assessment 
48 Who is eligible for ABHA ID card? 
 A All Indian Citizens 
 B Citizens with annual income below Rs. 5 lakhs A 
 C Citizens with BPL Card facility 
 D SC, ST and EWS of the society 
49 NDHM means ............. 
 A National Direct Health Medication 
 B Natinal Digital Health Monitoring D 
 C National Doctors and Health Mentors 
 D National Digital Health Mission 
50 With reference to Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jana Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) 
consider the following statements: 
1. It has been launched to achieve Universal Health Coverage 
2. It is the world’s largest health insurance scheme fully financed by the government and 
the cost of implementation is shared between the Centre and the State at 60:40 ratio 
3. It is applicable to the people aged 60 and above only 
 A 1 only 
 B 1 and 2 only B 
 C 1 and 3 only 
 D 2 and 3 only 
51 When the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ initiated? 
 A 2016 
 B 2015 D 
 C 2018 
 D 2014 
52 ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’ (Clean India Campaign) aims at: 
1. Eliminate open defecation 
2. Solid Waste Management 
 A 1 only 
 B 2 only D 
 C Neither 1 nor 2 
 D Both 1 and 2 
53 ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ is a restructured version of ............... 
 A ‘Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan’, 2009 
 B Clean India Campaign, 2009 A 
 C Clean City Campaign, 2009 
 D None of these 
54 Mahatma Gandhi’s 150 birth anniversary celebrated on ................... 
 A 2 October 2019 
 B 2 October 2020 A 
 C 2 October 2021 
 D 2 October 2018 
55 The ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ tagline ‘Ek Kadam Swachhata Ki Aur’ is given by .......... 
 A Shri Anant Khasbardar of Kolhapur, Maharashtra 
 B Sri Narendra Modi D 
 C M S Swaminathan 
 D Ms. Bhagyasri Sheth of Rajkot, Gujarat 
56 Who among the following has designed the logo of ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’? 
 A Shri Anant Khasbardar of Kolhapur, Maharashtra 
 B Sri Narendra Modi A 
 C M S Swaminathan 
 D Ms. Bhagyasri Sheth of Rajkot, Gujarat 
57 What is the budget amount fixed for Swachh Bharat Missin – Urban 2.0 will be effective from 
2021 to 2026. 
 A 100 crores 
 B 10.4 thousand crores D 
 C 75.1 thousand crores 
 D 1.41 lakh crores 
58 Which one of the following as a civil servant who led the ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’? 
 A Hari Chandana Dasari 
 B Parameswaran Iyer B 
 C Renu Raj 
 D Kunwar Bai Yadav 
59 At a rally in Champaran the Prime Minister called the campaign ‘satyagraha se swachhagrah’ in 
reference Gandhi Champaran Satyagrah launched on ............. 
 A 13 April 1919 
 B 10 April 1916 B 
 C 12 March 1931 
 D None of these 
60 In which place ‘Clean India Mission’ (Swachh Bharat Abhiyan) was officially launched? 
 A Patna, Bihar 
 B Rajghat, New Delhi B 
 C Lucknow, UP 
 D Kurukshethra, Haryana 
61 How many sub missions are there in ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’? 
 A Two 
 B Four A 
 C Six 
 D Three 
62 When was the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan launched? 
 A 2013 
 B 2009 B 
 C 2020 
 D 2012 
63 Which of the following is/are objectives of ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’? 
 A To eliminate open defecation 
 B Eradication of manual scavenging D 
 C Effective solid waste management 
 D All of these 
64 Which is the twitter hashtag used for ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’? 
 A #MyIncredible India 
 B #MyCleanIndia B 
 C #MyNeatIndia 
 D #MYSmartIndia 
65 On which day India observe the World Toilet Day?
 A 14 August 
 B 19 November B 
 C 13 February 
 D 15 September 
66 Which is the first city in our country free of manual scavenging? 
 A Alwar 
 B Bharuch A 
 C Trichy 
 D Jaipur 
67 Which is the cleanest village of India? 
 A Mawlynnong A 
 B Punsari 
 C Dharani 
 D Ballia 
68 What is the tagline of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan? 
 A One India, Clean India C 
 B Swachh Bharat Mera Bharat 
 C Ek Kadam Swachhata Ki Ore 
 D None of these 
69 Which of the following committee recommended for Panchayat Raj system in India? 
 A Drafting Committee 
B B Balwant Rai Mehta Committee 
 C Ashok Mehta Committee 
 D None of these 
70 Which of the following system is established on the basis of the direct election?
 A Panchayat Raj 
 B Block Committee A 
 C Zilla Parishad 
 D All of these 
71 Which of the following Article of Indian Constitution is related to Panchayati Raj?
 A Article 324 
 B Article 326 D 
 C Article 194 
 D Article 243 
72 What was the main purpose behind bringing the Panchayati Raj system to India?
 A Decentralization of the political power to the common public in villages 
 B Prevent the criminalization of politics A 
 C Development of villages 
 D To reduce election expenses 
73 Which schedule was added to the constitution by the 73rd Constitutional Amendment?
 A 8 Schedule 
 B 11 Schedule B 
 C 12 Schedule 
 D 10 Schedule 
74 Which statement is not correct regarding "Gram Sabha"?
 A It is a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls of a village 
comprised within the area of the Panchayat level 
C 
 B It is a village assembly consisting of all the registered voters in the area of the 
Panchayat 
 C Its power is determined by the central government 
 D Its powers and functions at the village level are like state legislature at the state 
level 
75 Which statement is true about Panchayati Raj? 
1. Its powers have been determined by the State Legislature
2. Minimum age should be 21 years to contest the election at the panchayat level 
3. Election of the Panchayati Raj institutions is conducted under the guidance of the State 
Election Commission
4. It is a three-tier system with panchayats at the lower level, panchayats samiti at 
intermediaty or mandal level and Zilla Parishad at district level 
 A 1 only 
 B 2 and 4 only D 
 C 1 and 3 only 
 D All of these are true 
76 How many posts are reserved for women at all levels in the Panchayati Raj system?
 A One–third 
 B One-fourth A 
 C Two-third 
 D There is no reservation for women in Pachayat Raj system. 
77 ‘Swachha Bharat Swachha Vidyalaya’ (SBSV) campaign with the objective of cleanliness in 
schools run by the Ministry of ..................... 
 A Environment and Forest 
 B Human Resource Development B 
 C Agriculture 
 D Urban Development 
78 What is the primary goal and focus of Swachha Bharat Mission? 
 A Clean India 
 B Digital India A 
 C Smart India 
 D Skill India 
79 When did the ‘Skill India’ or ‘National Skills Development Mission of India’ was launched? 
 A 15 July 2018 
 B 15 August 2016 C 
 C 15 July 2015 
 D None of these 
80 Which of the following country entered into a partnership in Skill India programme? 
 A Bhutan 
 B Russia D 
 C USA 
 D UK 
81 SANKALP means ....................... 
 A Skill Awareness and Knowledge Awareness for Loan Processing Programme 
 B Skill Acquisition and Knowledge Awareness for Livelihood Promotion B 
Programme 
 C Social Acquisition and Knowledge Acquisisition for Livelihood Promotion 
Programme 
 D None of these 
82 Skill India programmes are managed by ..................... 
 A National Skills Development Corporation of India (NSDC) 
 B Urban Development Corporation of India A 
 C Labour Unions 
 D None of these 
83 Skill India Mission is associated with the Ministry of .................. 
 A Labour and Family Welfare 
 B Human Resource Development C 
 C Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
 D NITI Ayog 
84 Which of the following is an initiative of Skill India Mission? 
 A Food for Life Programme 
 B Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) B 
 C Right to Education 
 D Grammen Sadak Yojana 
85 Consider the following statements about NRLM: 
1. It promotes the Self-employment and Organization of the rural poor 
2. It is supported by the World Bank with a credit of $ 1 Billion 
 A 1 only 
 B 2 only C 
 C Both 1 and 2 
 D None of these 
86 NRLM – Ajeevaka is launched by the Ministry of .................... 
 A Labour and Family Welfare 
 B Rural Development B 
 C Urban Development 
 D Human Resource Development 
87 This is a platform for sharing of experiences of SHGs and extends mutual support to improve 
the overall performance. 
 A Cluster Level Forum 
 B Community Level Forum A 
 C Common Leave Facility 
 D None of these 
88 NRLM follows ................... 
 A Supply Based Production Strategy 
 B Demand Driven Strategy B 
 C Income Driven Strategy 
 D None of these 
89 The World Bank (IBRD) in its World Development Report (2014) termed it as a "stellar 
example of rural development” 
Which one of the following initiative of the Central Government is termed as a ‘stellar example 
of rural development’ by the World Bank in its World Development Report, 2014? 
 A NRLM 
 B Rural Livelihood Mission C 
 C NREGA, 2005 
 D None of these 
90 NREGA aims to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least ............ days of 
wage employment in a financial year to at least one member of every household whose adult 
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
 A 180 
 B 200 D 
 C 150 
 D 100 
91 Under MNREGA scheme, who is mainly responsible as key functionary in implementing the 
schemes/works at village level? 
 A Village Secretary 
 B Gram Rozgar Sahayak B 
 C Gramin Vikas Adhikari 
 D None of these 
92 Which is the first state to employ the differently-abled, in MNREGA? 
 A Keral B 
 B Tamilnadu 
 C Gujarat 
 D Karnataka 
93 For how many years the registration of job card under MNREGA is valid? 
 A Five 
 B Four A 
 C Ten 
 D For life time 
94 Who selects the Social Audit Committee under MNREGA? 
 A Members of Zilla Panchayat 
C 
 B District Collector 
 C Grama Sabha 
 D Minister for Rural Devlopment 
95 Union Government increased workdays from 100 days to 150 days per year under MGNREGA 
in which state? 
 A Karnataka 
 B Tamil Nadu B 
 C Kerala 
 D Bihar 
96 In the cash benefits transferred last year under the Direct Benefits Transfer Scheme, the largest 
head under which DBT transfers were made was .............................. 
 A MNREGA 
A 
 B LPG Subsidy 
 C Fertilizer Subsidy 
 D Compensation to farmers for the loss due to flood, drought, and other 
calamities, etc. 
97 Which of the following is/are true regarding Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana — Gramin? 
1. Cost of unit assistance to be shared between Central and State Governments in the ratio 
75:25 in plain areas. 
2. The beneficiary will be entitled to 90 days of unskilled labour from MGNREGA 
 A 1 only 
 B 2 only B 
 C Both 1 and 2 
 D Neither 1 nor 2 
98 The NDA Government has decided to increase the number of workdays under MGNREGA 
from 100 days to ....................... days in drought-affected areas. 
 A 120 
 B 200 C 
 C 150 
 D 280 
99 National Mission for a Green India is merged with ................................... 
 A National River Conservation Scheme 
 B Swachh Bharat Abhiyan D 
 C National Afforestation Programme 
 D MNREGA 
100 Consider the following statements: 
1. MGNREGS fulfills the constitutional rights in India
2. MGNREGA is to be implemented mainly by gram panchayats 
3. The places where the recent unseasonal rain and hailstorms have affected crops the 
government will increase the number of work days under the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme from 100 to 200 days per year 
Which of these above statements are correct? 
 A 1 only 
 B 1 and 3 only D 
 C 2 and 3 only 
 D 1 and 2 only 
101 Which of the following can help in the development of human resource? 
 A Skill development 
 B Improving literacy and access to information D 
 C Training 
 D All of these 
102 Rural development aims at 
1. Improving rural health facilities 
2. Reducing poverty 
3. Development of rural infrastructure 
 A 1 only 
 B 2 only D 
 C 1 and 3 only 
 D 1, 2, and 3


1 Regulation that arises to ensure that firm takes responsibility for the social cost of their 
products or production process stem from the government legislation of business in order to 
............................. 
A Protect companies from each other
C 
B Protect companies from unfair business practices
C Protect the interest of the society
D Protect the business from unfair consumers’ demand
2 The defenders of the sustainability approach of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) point 
out that 
1. All economic activities exist within the biosphere that support life 
2. The success of the business is judged only against profitability 
3. People have a strong ethical duty to cause no harm and only a prime facie duty to 
prevent harm 
4. The sole responsibility of the business is to fulfill the economic functions they were 
deserved to serve and the customer service is the most important purpose of the 
business 
Choose the most appropriate answer given from the below. 
A 2 only 
B 4 only D 
C 1, 3 and 4 only
D 1 only
3 Which of the following are the parts of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) to 
consumers? 
1. Reasonable chances and proper system for accomplishment and promotion 
2. To supply goods at reasonable prices even when there is sellers market (i.e., the 
market where the demand is more and supply is less) 
3. Improving the efficiency of the business operation 
4. To provide an opportunity of being heard and redress genuine grievances 
A 1 only 
C 
B 2 only 
C 2 and 4 only
D 1, 3 and 4 only
4 With reference to Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) which of the following statements 
is/are true? 
1. Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility) Rules, 2014 introduces mandatory CSR 
2. Under section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 every company having a net-worth 
atleast Rs. 500 crore, turnover of Rs. 1000 crore or more, or a minimum net profit of 
Rs.5 crore during the immediately preceding financial year has to make CSR 
expenditure 
3. Companies covered under this will have to spend atleast 1% of their annual net profit 
in the activities under CSR 
A 1 and 3 only
B 1 and 2 only B 
C 2 and 3 only 
D 1, 2 and 3
5 As per Carrol Model, the four levels of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) are ...................
A Physical, economic, legal, ethical
B Philanthropic, economic, legal, ethical B 
C Physical, economic, social, legal
D Philanthropic, economic, social, legal
6 With reference to the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) which of the following statements 
is/are true? 
1. Companies Act, 2014 includes mandatory CSR 
2. Companies covered under this act have to spend atleast 1% of their annual net profit 
on activities under CSR 
A Both 1 and 2
B 1 only C 
C Neither 1 nor 2
D 2 only
7 Select the correct sequence of the following CSR eligibility criteria and spending as per the 
provisions of the Indian Companies Act, 2013. 
1. Positive net worth of Rs. 500 crores or more 
2. 2% of the average profit to be spent on activities under CSR 
3. Net profit of Rs. 5 crore or more in a given financial year 
4. Turnover of Rs. 1000 crore or more 
5. Penal action for non-compliance 
A 2, 4, 1, 3,and 5
B 
B 1, 4, 3, 2 and 5
C 1, 4, 2, 3 and 5
D 1, 2, 4, 3 and 5
8 Corporate Social Responsibility is the continuing commitment by the business to behave 
ethically and contribute to................. 
1. Political awareness, social security and inclusion 
2. Public health, education and literacy 
3. Maintaining ecological balances and protecting environment 
4. Gender diversity, profiteering and market controlling 
5. Rendering, sponsoring, and donating to social and charitable activities 
Choose the correct answer from the options given below. 
A 1, 2, 3, and 5 only
B 1 and 4 only C 
C 2, 3, and 5 only
D 1, 3, and 5 only
9 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) means........................
A Dealing with complications of social life
B Corporate life having social responsibility
C Compliance of ecological and social responsibility of the companies and 
organizations 
C
D All of these
10 ............................ depends of a product’s perceived performance in delivering value relative to 
a buyer’s expectations. 
A Customer’s satisfaction
A 
B Product quality
C Customer loyalty
D Product Image branding
11 A Corporate company makes donations to charitable institutions; build recreational facilities 
for employees and their families, support educational institutions, orphanage, promotion of 
performing arts, and other activities. In CSR this dimension is known as ...................... 
A Legal responsibility 
 C 
B Economic responsibility
C Philanthropic responsibility
D Ethical responsibility
12 What is meant by the phrase CSR?
A Company Social Responsibility
B Corporate Society Responsibility D 
C Company Society Responsibility
D Corporate Social Responsibility
13 What is the enlightened self-interest model of CSR? 
A That it is in an organization's own best interest to put itself first rather than its 
ethics 
D 
B That it is in an organization's best interest to consider what a shareholder 
would want 
C That it is in an organization's own best interest to follow the legislation and 
abide by the law 
D That it is in an organization's own best interest to act in an ethical way
14 What is Triple Bottom Line?
A A management strategy which states all the attention should be on profits
B An accounting tool that looks at cost, profit and loss C 
C An accounting tool that looks at the impact on people, planet and profits
D A management strategy which focuses on corporate social responsibility
15 Which of the following would most effectively act as the primary objective of a business 
enterprise/organization? 
A To make a profit
B To procure resources A 
C To communicate with shareholders/stakeholders
D To mediate between the organization and the environment
16 Which of the following does the term Corporate Social Responsibility relate to?
A Ethical conduct 
B Environmental practice D
C Community investment
D All of these
17 Who are Organizational Stakeholders?
A Government
B Employees D 
C Customers
D All of these
18 Which of the following related to the concept of business ethics?
A Right to Information Act
B Food Act A 
C Building regulations
D All of these
19 A high commitment to environmental issues include all the following except ................... 
A Risk analysis
B Stakeholder analysis D 
C Strategic sustainability auditing
D Green Washing
20 The acronym CSR stands for...............
A Corporate Social Responsibility
B Corporate Search and Reuse A 
C Corporate Sensitive Reliability
D Corporate Social Reality
21 Which of the following is not an underlying principles of Corporate Governance Combined 
Code of Practice? 
A Openness 
B 
B Acceptability 
C Integrity 
D Accountability 
22 What is the minimum amount of average net profit that companies should invest under CSR 
activities? 
A 0.002 
B B 0.02 
C 0.005 
D 0.05
23 Which clause of the Companies Act, 2013 makes Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
mandatory? 
A 153 
B 125 
C C 135 
D 150 
24 What should be the net worth of the companies to be under the preview of Companies Act, 
2013? 
A Rs. 500 crore 
A 
B Rs. 1000 Crore 
C Rs. 5 Crore 
D Rs. 100 Crore
25 What concern do Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) address?
A Ethical and regulatory guidelines 
D 
B Moral and Ethical 
C Monetary and Profit 
D Social and Environmental
26 Who is popularly recognised as the ‘Father of Corporate Social Responsibility’ in India being 
instrumental in framing and issuing the CSR guidelines to Public Sector Understanding (PSE)? 
A Former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh 
B C V K Kurian 
C Bhaskar Chatterjee 
D M S Swaminathan




